# Spatial-and-Social-Attributes-as-Predictors-of-Health-Outcomes_A-Community-Ecology-Approach_2020
Life history theory suggests that there are fitness trade-offs between survival and reproduction when an individual is exposed to environmental stress.  Stress present in both physical and social environments can trigger physiological, behavioral, and developmental responses in an individual, impacting their health.  Research has also shown that the lack of social connectedness has a negative impact on health.  In this independent analysis of data from the European Social Survey European Research Infrastructure Consortium (ESS ERIC), a cross-national longitudinal survey from 2002-2018 that included over thirty (30) countries in Europe (n=106,320) suggests that domicile type may be used as a predictor of health.  Stressors such as being a victim of burglary or assault, living with a partner, being divorced, having a parent that is absent or deceased, or having a mother that is self-employed tend to have poorer health outcomes.  Social involvement in the community through voting has a significant effect on positive health outcomes.  Data from the study also suggest that respondents’ perceptions of safety and happiness may act as a proximate mechanism with a significant effect on health outcomes. The data has been adapted to fit a community ecology framework to better understand if health outcomes may be predicted at a community level.  Linking social connectedness to the physical environment will allow researchers, architects, and policy makers to better understand the important relationship between these social dimensions in the built environment and health outcomes.
